Jared JohnsonPHIL 301 – Thought Paper 1Total Word Count: 3,737The Duty of Charity: A Rumination of Philanthropic ObligationOf all the topics involved in defining ourselves morally and producing a consensus of proper ethics, perhaps none is more controversial and opaque than outlining a human’s charitable obligations to society. We live in a diverse world of vast knowledge with no shortage of information and ideas. With all the different points of view regarding what is right and wrong, it becomes very difficult for a group of any amount of people to truly agree upon what we, as human beings, should consider a duty or obligation to the whole of society in our day-to-day lives. More specifically: To what extent are we ethically obliged to help others who lack what we consider the necessities of life? Can we put a dollar amount on our charitable responsibility? To one extreme, there is no duty to give to charity and anyone who acquires such charity should consider himself or herself lucky and obliged to the donor. To the contrary, charity should be assumed a duty as a human being active in our society, and anything not necessary to one’s livelihood should be donated to help those less fortunate in order to provide the most well being for the greatest number of people. Most of us would consider ourselves somewhere between these two extremes and with most respects to ethical study, rightfully so. So if we can’t seem to conclude, with certainty, a concrete answer of where we should be on this scale of philanthropy; it’s important to consider what others think, why they think that way, and whether we should reconsider our own positions on charity.	On the most charitable side of the scale of philanthropy, Peter Singer explains his view in his article, “The Singer Solution to World Poverty”. In this third person account, Singer uses a Brazilian film titled “Central Station” to clarify his position. In this movie, a schoolteacher named Dora unknowingly helps deliver a young homeless boy to his supposed adoptive parents, only to find out later he was actually going to be killed and his organs sold for transplantation. Dora goes on to save the boy and Singer poses a critical question, “In the end, what is the ethical distinction between a Brazilian who sells a homeless child to organ peddlers and an American who already has a TV and upgrades to a better one — knowing that the money could be donated to an organization that would use it to save the lives of kids in need?” (Singer, para. 7) In another example, Singer references a book written in 1996 by philosopher Peter Unger, “Living High and Letting Die”. In his book, Unger presents a series of fictitious stories to help us think about how we live and consider our own obligations to give to charity. One of such stories involves Bob and his precious Bugatti sports car that he has invested in as his retirement fund. Bob is put in a situation to decide whether to save a child’s life or save his car from annihilation. He chooses to preserve his financial security and the child is killed. Both Unger and Singer agree that letting the child die is very wrong and Bob made the wrong choice. That being considered, Singer goes on to remind us we all have the abilities to save a child on a daily basis and shows how Unger includes the toll-free numbers for Unicef and Oxfam America directly in his book. Unger also includes a calculation of $200 as being enough to offer safe passage for a child between the years of two and six. Both of these stories include the potential demise of children as everyone can agree they have not brought the poverty upon themselves, and the examples can be used to simplify things and rule out a number of arguments. Singer then goes on to claim that by not donating to save a child’s life, we are no better than Bob and his Bugatti. One difference between Bob and us is Bob is the only one who could have saved that child, whereas we all have the capabilities to save a child every day. He introduces our inclination to use follow-the-crowd ethics- the kind of ethics that justified Nazi engagements to the German people. (Singer, para. 16) There’s definitely a sense of guilt imposed on the reader at this point in the article. You’re encouraged to pick up the phone and donate in order to free your conscience from feeling like a child-murdering, Nazi-endorsing, self-righteous prude. To defend his philanthropic stance, Singer then goes on to try and define the end to which we should consider our charities sufficient. “… only when the sacrifices become very significant indeed would most people be prepared to say that Bob does nothing wrong when he decides not to throw the switch.” (para. 20)  He then considers a salary of $50,000 and concludes in order to be morally decent, $20,000 of that salary should be donated annually. If more or less is made, the equivalent percentage should be considered. Singer then ends his article by claiming Bob’s situation is not merely unlucky, as we should consider ourselves to be in the very same situation, all the time.	Being that Singer is a self-proclaimed utilitarian philosopher; in order to properly assess his claims and determine if they are right or wrong, one should first analyze one of the founders of utilitarianism, John Stuart Mill. An examination of Mill’s book, “Utilitarianism” reveals many similarities between Mill and Singer and helps prove Singer’s philosophical stance. Mill spends much of this book simply defining what exactly utilitarianism is, in order to dispel any misrepresentations. In explaining his ideologies, Mill writes about the greatest happiness principal as “… an existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and as rich as possible in enjoyments, both in point of quantity and quality…” (Mill, p.12) This principal is paramount in defining to what end all moral actions should strive for. Mill and utilitarianism look objectively at the consequences of actions in order to choose the best course based on the least amount of pain and the most happiness for the most individuals. This seems to coincide quite nicely with Singer’s view that we are not appropriately distributing wealth amongst the world in order for the most people to achieve the most happiness. Mill also describes his utilitarianism by asserting that he who saves someone from drowning is doing the right thing whether he did it because he cares about the person and he wants to save the person, or he did it to receive a reward. This cut and dry mentality is evident in Singer’s insistence that we should be giving to charity whether we do it for the children or not. If we have enough money for a new TV, that money should go to the children whether we like it or not. The simple fact that happiness is not evenly distributed is reason enough to require you to give, even if you’re just doing it for tax breaks or because your philosophy tells you to. Another similarity between Mill and Singer comes in Mill’s assessment of the quantitative and qualitative differences in pleasures. He claims the most relevant are the pleasures of the intellect and those of lesser faculties will strive towards pleasures of sensation. This could relate to Singer’s article as the differences between those who understand the importance of equally distributing wealth and prosperity, with those who choose to value their fancy material possessions and indulge in sensual pleasures. If you don’t give to charity, you are more concerned with what your excess wealth can contribute to your own sensations. Mill writes about who should be considered moral experts and therefor capable of determining what is right and wrong. Those humans that instinctively seek intellectual pleasure above all others can often “… lose their high aspirations as they lose their intellectual tastes, because they have not time or opportunity for indulging them; and they addict themselves to inferior pleasures…” (Mill, p. 11) Singer also believes most of us fall victim to this incompetency by failing to recognize our material luxuries (inferior pleasures) are taking precedence over our intellectual ability to recognize there is a lack of equality and happiness in the world, and happiness and pleasure; that of which is the ultimate desire, is not being optimized. 	Traditional utilitarianism can also be referenced to disagree with “The Singer Solution to World Poverty”. Mill asserts a certain hierarchy between “competent individuals” and those less qualified. It can easily be interpreted that Mill believes in optimizing happiness of all, as long as you belong to this defined group of intellectually sufficient human beings. There seems to be a number of qualitative nuances in Mill’s account that seem to stray from a desire for true democracy to a system that rules out those who don’t qualify as competent. Beyond suggesting many humans can be deemed incapable or misled, Mill also makes it very apparent that animals are incapable of the intellectual pleasures of man and are of a lesser faculty and therefor not a factor in the quality of pleasure. It’s not necessary to consider the pig’s happiness, or the idiot’s, or the misled. This seems to stray from Singer’s more universal morality. Singer opens his article with a reference to his book, “Animal Liberation”, to describe his own provocation. It seems his philanthropy stems from a more modern definition of global equality. He seems to suggest we’re all the same, whether we’re poor, incompetent, or raised on a farm. And why should we live so lavishly when there are so many others, whether they’re children or members of a less competent culture, who don’t even have the means to sustain their own livelihood? Though there appears to be some differences between Mill and Singer, it seems their stances on charitable duty are quite similar. The disparities appear to reflect the 130+ years difference between them, while the foundations of utilitarianism maintain their core consequentialist ideologies.	In Immanuel Kant’s, “Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals”, many disputes against Singer’s justifications are equally, if not more, supportable. Kant’s primary ethical claims involve the good will, the importance of reason, and the resulting definition of duty. Considering the drowning person referenced earlier to illustrate Mill’s similarities with Singer, Kant would insist saving the person is only good if the savior is acting out of respect for the drowning person’s life. If they are merely expecting a reward or something of instrumental value, they are not morally right. Kant thinks reason’s “…true function must be to produce a will which is not merely good as a means to some further end, but is good in itself.” (p.9) To back up this anti-consequentialist notion, consider the inept evil person. Although their actions produce harmful consequences, certain unforeseen circumstances may have good consequences. So the will must be good in itself, but what makes a will or action intrinsically good? Kant explains the action must at once be considered a duty and also performed because it is a duty. “Duty is the necessity of an action done out of respect for the law.” (Kant, p. 13) Here, Kant is referring to a sort of natural law that governs all living things. It is created by God for rational creatures and is unconditioned, objective, and hence universally valid. (Kant, p. 26) For instance, we have a duty to not tell a lie but if we don’t tell a lie simply to avoid consequences, we are not acting in accord with duty and the act of not lying would actually not have moral value. So for Kant, to give money to starving children simply because we ought to, and since we have more than enough money to sustain our own livelihood, is not morally right to give when merely considering those factors. If we’re donating to avoid the consequence of a child dying and not because we want to, it’s still not right. If we’re donating for the sake of tax breaks, it’s not right. If we’re donating in a beneficent manner because of our sympathetic inclination, it’s not right. (If it’s because we want to be praised.) (Kant, p. 11) We would be fulfilling a duty of charity but we wouldn’t be giving because it’s a duty. On the other hand, to not give when you are flourishing is immoral to Kant. Since the maxim cannot be universalized according to the categorical imperative, it would be wrong to withhold aid. (Kant, p.32) According to Kant, when in distress, any rational creature would will the receipt of aid. Also, to not give would be contradicting, for he who doesn’t give when capable would eventually have …”need of the love and sympathy of others and in which he would deprive himself.” (Kant, p. 32) So on Kantian grounds, Singer’s prescribed obligation to charity is right only if the intentions of the donor are truly out of respect for the children, and not merely because withholding their excess income is immoral. We have a duty to give to those less fortunate, but we also have a duty to care. It seems Kant would agree with Singer that we have a responsibility to feed starving children, but it would be irrational to quantify dollars and cents, as there is no end to that logic. And unless we truly dedicate ourselves to the cause emotionally, we might as well just keep our money.	With regards to quantifying the amount of charity we should give, relativism is probably the most appropriate doctrine from which to reference. It would state that we should give in relation to our personal situation. It would also decree that there is no absolute obligation to charity either. Relativism takes the position that all points of view are equally valid in relation to the individual making the point. If a relativist could agree with a utilitarian that giving to charity is the right thing to do, they would also agree that the amount should be relative to the individual’s salary. However, a relativist could also bring up never-ending arguments about why certain people don’t have an obligation when considering their personal life situation. Singer addresses such an argument in the Bugatti Bob situation. Should Bob still throw the switch to save the child if his foot is stuck in the track and he would lose his leg? A relativist would raise questions such as these. In Norman Melchert’s “Who’s to Say?: a dialogue on relativism”, a conversation between several people of varying philosophical stances brings many things to light. A relativist in the group sums up his outlook nicely: “… the standards we apply- the very rules of rationality itself- are matters for which no good reasons can be given, since these standards themselves determine what counts as a good reason.” (Melchert, p. 51) He’s saying that neither Singer nor Kant nor Mill can assert what it means to be rational, or why we’re obliged to give to charity, or to what end our giving or taking should come; since all of their defined standards are already contaminated by their own theories. (Melchert, p. 51) There is no truly objective outlook to tell us we have an unarguable duty to give to those who are in need. There is always a reason to oppose everything.	 My own personal beliefs in the matter of philanthropic duty do not contend with Singer’s article, nor do they completely agree. My approach is mostly scientific, or more appropriately, metaphysical. In fact, to me, the only viewpoint discussed so far that I can say I agree with completely is that of Kant’s. His scientific approach to ethics is what basically defined the field of natural philosophy; which later became the empirical activity known as science. He has a way of defining the good will and what is truly righteous to the best of our human abilities. I agree with him that we have a human duty to help those in need as we all rely on each other, and at the same time we must give with the right intentions and for the right reasons. No living thing within the realm of human understanding is completely self-sufficient and therefor requires the charity of other living things in order to survive. The wealthy conservative businessman may claim he built his empire on his own, but the reality is he couldn’t have done it without others. He needed charity in the form of random favors, investors, lines of credit, etc.… He has a human duty to give back to society so that others can flourish as he has. Can we put a dollar amount on his charitable duty? I think Kant and I would agree there is no way to quantify such an endless decision, it is more important we decide that he must give because he has a duty to give and not because society tells him he should. Does a man on a deserted island rely on the charity of others? He may not rely on humans but he certainly relies heavily on the charity of the coconut trees and the fish and the plants that support his livelihood. Does a plant rely on charity from other living things? It relies on the sun but also the nutrients from the decay of organic matter that was once living. Everything in our world is cyclical and relies on the former and latter to continue with existence. There is the same amount of matter on earth as there was 4 billion years ago. Life exists as a result of the delicate balance of meticulously created resources that must stay in sync with one another. To be a member of society and not give back the resources you’ve used to support your livelihood throws off the balance of civilization. It can be assumed in this manner that those kids are starving because of the immoral actions of people that don’t follow this delicate order of nature. We absolutely have a duty to give to charity, but to what end? I don’t believe that can be answered. We must rely on instinct to determine when and how much we should give. There are many things in this world we’re simply not capable of understanding and I believe this is an example of such things. Can we define why music is enjoyable? Why love is necessary to existence? Why staring at a sunset brings contentment? We all must come up with our own reasons and quantities to give to charity. My current situation deems that I have very little income being a full-time student. I believe there is very little I can donate besides used clothing and such without dramatically affecting my own livelihood. According to Singer’s logic, we need $30,000/year per household to live comfortably and beyond that, call Unicef and write a check. In 2012, I lived very comfortably as a household of 1 with $20,000. Should I have then called Unicef and asked for $10,000? With regards to Singer’s quantification, I take a relativistic approach. You should give according to your personal situation. And your situation is entirely unique and should not be bound by any kind of comparison.   	An analysis of philanthropic duty brings no shortage of perspectives and opinions. Just as your life situation in regard to your duty has unlimited possibilities, the subjective dogmas on this topic will never cease. After considering all of these perspectives including my own, I believe it’s the dogma itself that’s confusing what’s right and what’s morally wrong. Dogmatism has no place in quantifying charitable duty. There should be no authority to define what is a righteous amount of charity. We simply need to maintain the need for all of us as humans to give to one another. The utilitarian dogma of giving a defined amount, lest be shunned, is contradictory. If it is the goal of the utilitarian to evenly distribute happiness and optimize well being for all, why does the conclusion in determining philanthropic duty involve chastising the large majority of us that aren’t giving enough? Singer even admits in his article, “If that makes living a morally decent life extremely arduous, well, then that is the way things are.” (Singer, para.26) Is that not a blatant admission that his outlook doesn’t work? In his end, everyone lives extremely arduous lives. It’s this same mentality that has caused me to lose almost all respect for any organized religion. It’s saying, “do this stuff that you hate to do and brings you discontent, or face dire consequences for eternity.” If there is a God or if Jesus does exist, would they really shun us for not doing what some book (dogma that man conceived) tells us to do? I thought the point of religion was to bring comfort and love to everyone. The point of charity should be the same. Singer’s admitted defeat is the same downfall in relativism. The end in relativity says, “That’s just the way it is”. “That’s my outlook and it’s true for me so that’s that.” “… true for me is the perfect defensive maneuver.” (Melchert, p.75) We’re not really solving anything by saying the choice to give to charity is relative to the individual. Nature tells us we have a responsibility to keep the cycle going by taking and then giving back. And as Kant suggests, nature gives us our abilities. Our instincts don’t provide the means to happiness- they provide reason, and reason does not impart happiness. A more intended purpose of life is not happiness but rather, reason; which must be regarded as the supreme condition to which men defer. (Kant, p.9) Singer’s utilitarianism aims at spreading happiness. “…happiness is not an ideal of reason but of imagination. Such an ideal rests merely on empirical grounds…” (Kant, p. 28) I find Kant’s scrutiny of happiness and the ensuing innuendo eluding to the meaning of life a beautiful analysis, as complete as any theory I’ve ever encountered describing man’s most important questions. We have to look to our roots in nature and reason when we attempt to answer such difficult questions. If we’re trying to decide whether we should help those in need, we need to merely observe the symbiosis of nature to realize we simply wouldn’t exist were it not for charity, and any amount of a good thing is good.Works CitedKant, Immanuel, and James W. Ellington. Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals. 3rd ed. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett, 1993. Print.Melchert, Norman. Who's to Say?: A Dialogue on Relativism. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub., 1994. Print.Mill, John Stuart., and George Sher. Utilitarianism. 2nd ed. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett, 2001. Print.Singer, Peter. "The Singer Solution to World Poverty." The New York Times 5 Sept. 1999: n. pag. Print.